Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Juliana Feist. She is
a professor at the Institute of Philosophy at the
University of Hanover, and today we're talking about her
book, Operationism in Psychology and Epistemology of Exploration. So,
Doctor Feist, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you for having me.
So what motivated you to write such a book?
What are its premises?
Um, WHAT motivated me, this book actually took me
a really long time to write. Uh, SO I
guess it's good to be asked what actually started
it, um, because then throughout working on the book,
I think more and more different questions and motivations
kind of appeared. But the earliest motivation really was
that I had a background in psychology before I
got into history and philosophy of science. So I
went to graduate school in history and philosophy of
Science, but I had already, I had a prior
degree in psychology. And, uh, and had always had
an interest in philosophy, uh, especially philosophy of language
at the time. And I was curious to see
that in philosophy of language, whenever people talked about
operational definitions, uh, and you noticed that I have
the term operationism in the title of my book.
Uh, SO when people in philosophy talked about operational
definitions, it seemed to be kind of understood that
That that's a bad thing, and that, you know,
that's a very outmoded way of talking about the
meaning of concepts. And coming out of psychology, I
felt that that wasn't quite capturing what psychologists have
in mind when they say that they're operationally defining
their concepts. So, really, I think at the bottom
of the start of this, this project really was
this kind of interest in what is it that
operational definitions do in psychology, what does operationism or
operationalism, uh, actually, the, the two terms mean the
same as far as I'm concerned. So, so what,
what, um, what function does this position have in
actual research?
Mhm. Uh, AND what is the philosophy of experimentation,
which is basically the area you're dealing with in
your book?
Right, great. Uh, THE philosophy experimentation, um, is something
I got interested in as I was thinking about
this, uh, this project. Because increasing, so, I guess
the reason why I thought that there's more to
operational definitions than what is commonly assumed in philosophy
of language was because I saw psychologists when they're
thinking about how to design their experiments, they're thinking
about, well, how should I operationally define my concepts.
That's kind of the first choice you have to
make. Um, AND we'll get back to in what
sense they mean operationally defined. But, um, So, so
then that drew my attention to the fact that
there is an area of philosophy of science, um,
called philosophy of experimentation, which, uh, in its kind
of most recent installment, um, Started in the 1980s,
I would say. So Ian Hacking is a big
name, but other names in the 1980s are Alan
Franklin, Deborah Mayo. Uh, Friedrich Steinle and, and, and
kind of more on the side of history of
science. So it kind of starts in both philosophy
of science and history of science. And it questions
some, um, some of the basic assumptions of traditional
philosophy of science, which typically starts with theories, right?
So, so, and that's like in, in Ian Hacking's
book, Representing and intervening, he has that very nicely
in the book. Traditional, I mean, obviously, this is
all very you know, uh, idealized and doesn't probably
do justice to every individual working in philosophy of
science, but he has this, this, this general line
of saying, in philosophy of science, people talk about
theories as if they were already there, uh, kind
of coming out of nowhere. And then the question
is, how do we justify them by means of
evidence, right? Uh, AND then in, in that picture,
experiments only have one role to play, namely to
Uh, to pro produce data in support of, uh,
of a theory. And one thing that hacking notes
at the time is they never talk about, um,
other functions of experiments that other functions of experiments
might play other than, um, test theories, and they
also don't talk about how data are produced. And
so that's really the, the bit that really kind
of grabbed my attention because I think that is
crucial, uh, and probably in all of experimental science,
but especially in, in the one that I'm familiar
with, kind of thinking about what kind of question
am I pursuing and how do I go about
producing data that will speak to that question. So,
uh, so I guess I kind of did, uh,
you were asking what is philosophy of experimentation, um,
Yeah, and I guess I answered the follow-up question
already, which is, what is it that is that
I find interesting about it?
Mhm. So, in the book, you go through an
example to introduce the kinds of questions you're interested
in, in, uh, tell us about the example of
the study of implicit memory and the kinds of
questions it raises.
So one of the things that I highlight in
the book is that the um that the epistemic
situation of researchers is characterized by um By kind
of lack kind of conceptual openness and um with
respect, and with respect to the, what the object
that they're studying, it is characterized by uh what
I say, what I call epistemic blurriness. So they,
they maybe start out by thinking, here's, here's something
I'm interested in, but I'm not really quite sure,
you know, what it is, and that's why I
study it. Uh, AND you were just mentioning implicit
memory, which is one of the examples I use,
um, and so So then that kind of raises
the very fundamental question of, well, if, if this
object that I'm interested in, well, first of all,
why do I think that there is an object,
right? Um, WHAT kind of, what gives rise to
this idea that there's an object that I would,
that, that I, that I ought to be interested
in? Uh, AND secondly, given that, given this kind
of blurriness of the object, how do I get
an empirical handle on, um, on how to study
it? Uh, NOW remind me what was your question.
Oh yeah, so the example was like the, the
example I, so I use implicit memory kind of
to illustrate something about both of these questions. Um,
SO implicit memory is a concept that emerges in
philosophy in, in psychology, excuse me, in the early
1970s, and, um. And it gets introduced kind of
alongside a new kind of memory test. Uh, SO
people up to then kind of the standard way
of testing for memory is, you know, you have
people memorize something and then you present them with
a test, and that can be either, uh, recall
or recognition. So you ask people, uh, do you
recall, you know, seeing this item before? Or, or
you say, uh, do you, or do you recall
what the items that we presented you, that's recall
and recognition is here I'm presenting you with a
list, which of those have you seen before in,
in, in the previous study period. So those are
what we would now call explicit tests because they
ask subjects to explicitly report on what they remember.
And then this new type, type of test became
uh Or was introduced, um, Namely priming tests, and
priming tests have a different, uh have they use
a different um strategy for getting at people's memories,
namely by um Presenting them with so-called primes. So,
I might in the study period have presented you
with a bunch of words, and then in the,
in the test period, I might um Uh, oh
no, sorry, sorry. I might do a study for
period that give you, yeah, give you some, some
things to remember in the, and then before testing
whether you remember them, I prime you by, for
example, giving you words that are semantically related to
the ones that I want you to remember. So,
you might not remember, um, The previous ones that
you studied. Like, so on an explicit test, you
might not remember what, what, that you, whatever, uh
Were presented with, uh, that, that, that you previously
learned the word um Butter. Um, BUT, but if
I give you the word bread as a, as
a prime, um, and ask you to, to freely
associate something that comes to your mind, you will,
you will produce the word butter. And so, then
that is taken as an indicator that something of
the previous study period, um, kind of stuck. Um,
uh, AND, and so, and even if you don't
remember that you learned this word, um, some, there's
The prime triggers, the, the recollection of it, and
because this is not, uh, and this kind of
result is um dissociated from the results of experimental
tests, meaning that people who uh can, can do
well on the one while not doing well on
the other with the same kinds of items. So
this kind of functional dissociation gave rise to the
idea that there might be two types of memory.
Uh, I'm gonna say memory systems, but really it's
often used much more vaguely that there are two
types of memory. Um, AND with that idea that,
oh, we're testing, do we have a functional dissociation
between the results of two different types of memory
tests. That gives rise to the idea that we
have a novel object of research. We have an
object of research that is separate. It's a type
of memory, but it's different from the type of
memory from what we previously thought memory was. And
so for the time being, we're just gonna try
and investigate this further and we're gonna use priming
tests as a way to access this um supposed
or this, um, yeah, this, this type of memory
that we now think might exist. Mhm.
So, how the, how are conceptual work and experimental
work intertwined?
Um, Yeah, good question. And I think it directly
follows up on, on what I was just talking
about. My, my, um, so this is basically a
very, very basic premise of the entire book is
that conceptual and experimental work is intertwined, or rather
that if you do experimental work in psychology, it's
intertwined with conceptual work. Um, AND I, and I
consciously kind of contrast conceptual and theoretical because I
don't want to start with the idea that I
already have a theory. And now I'm just testing
it, but rather, I have a vague conception of
an object, and that vague conception of an object,
basically that, that concept is what gets further articulated.
In the course of doing experimental work. And so
experimental and conceptual work are intertwined in the following
way. I need at least a rough concept to
do an experiment on the object in the first
place, but ideally, the results of the experiments I
do are going to inform the concept. Um, AND,
um, and thus, you know, improve the concept. So,
in case, um, listeners are familiar with Hasso Chang's
work on, on iterative, the iterative process of scientific
investigation, this is a similar idea that we kind
of have a back and forth between kind of
the concept informing the types of experiments we produce,
we, we set up, and the kinds of data
we produce, which in turn, um, Mm And, well,
if things go well, inform the concept or kind
of feedback into the concept.
Mhm. So, uh, tell us then about how experiments
are designed not only to test theories but also
to perform other epistemic functions as well, such as
detecting entities or calibrating instruments.
So I think what, what you're referring to here
is, uh, is the Well, some of the, the
crucial insights of early work in philosophy experimentation were,
were scholars like Hacking or, or Steinle, um, said
this is a very idealized, abstracted, uh what, you
know, the, the notion that experiments only test theories
is very idealized and doesn't really do justice to
kind of the work that's being done on the
ground. Um, And then they, they Draw attention, especially
hacking and also Alan Franklin, draw attention to the
ways in which experiments can be used to, uh,
for example, performing multiple experiments can, can be a
way of, um, arguing for the reality of a
given entity. Um, HACKING has, um, has different kinds
of, of arguments, but, but one is about, um,
if you, if you, if you're detecting. Uh, SORRY,
I was gonna say electron, but if you're, if
you're detecting a particular entity in a microscope, um,
How do you know that what you're detecting is,
is, um, is really there, as opposed to being
an, an artifact of the, of the instrument. So,
so then his, one of the, one of the
kind of um ideas he introduced into the literature
is, well, if you can detect a similar thing
by means of multiple different instruments, you are kind
of simultaneously uh providing Um, Providing more and more
evidence, independent evidence of the reality of that thing
that, that you're seeing, but you're also kind of
cross validating the instrument. So if multiple instruments validate
the same, uh uh uh detect the same thing,
that also strengthens, uh, not only our belief in
the reality of the thing that is being detected,
but also in the reliability of the, of the
instruments. So that's kind of one way in, in
which Um, experiments can play a role other than
theory testing. Um, AND for, again, for, for hacking,
it has this kind of dual function. He's, he's
an entity realist, so he wants to say, rather
than simply testing whether theories are true or maybe
more importantly than testing whether theories are true, we
try to test whether particular entities really exist. So
that's kind of um in the tradition um that,
that was started by people like Hack in the
1980s. In my own work, I kind of want
to go beyond that, or at least I feel
that in psychology, that's not quite the right question
to ask because we're not dealing with, you know,
tiny entities that we see under microscopes. We're dealing
with very complex. Objects that are constituted of multiple
phenomena. And so, um, so in my work and
maybe we can talk about this in, in, in
more detail in a moment, um, I'm really more
interested in how our experiments used to explore objects
of psychological research.
Right. So tell us then about those objects. What
are the objects of research in experimental psychology? Are
they phenomena? Are they mechanisms or something else?
So they can be all of the above, but
the way that I, that I think of objects
of res of psychological research specifically. Um, IS, is
that there are kind of clusters of phenomena, but
maybe let me take a step back first and,
uh, and just talk about the notion of an
object of research because I mean it's maybe intuitively
clear an object of research is the object that
we're interested in, but I also, I use it
in a somewhat um. A slightly different sense, or
at least I'd like to capture the, the, the
fact that when you're interested in a particular object,
uh, you don't know whether it's going to be
a legitimate. Uh, OBJECT in the long run, like
you're, like, like, let's take implicit memory, you know,
you have these results on priming effects as associated
from effects on, on explicit memory. You're kind of
hypothetically thinking there, there might be something there that's
worth investigating. I'm gonna call it implicit memory. Now,
that's an object of research, but it might not
end up being a stable object. It might not
end up Uh, be, you know, playing, um, an
important theoretical role, you know, in the, in the
future of psychology, but at the point in time
when, when uh, when the psychologist comes up with
this concept, they don't know this, right? So an
object of research has inherently, it's, it's on the
one, it's the object that we're directing our attention
to, but it also inherently has that uncertainty about.
Uh, WE don't know a lot about it, and
we don't even know whether it will turn out
to be a kind of a, a stable kind
of psychological kind that in the long run we're
gonna believe to be, you know, real or important.
So, so an object of research in my mind
has, uh, so by saying object of research, I'm
not committing to a realism about that object. Uh,
HOWEVER, I am saying that psychologists, in order to
do research on, on an object of, on such
an object, they have to have a, a somewhat
realistic attitude to, toward it, you know, you can't,
you can't explore something unless you think that there's
something to explore. So. OK, so that's kind of
about the, the general notion of an object of
research, um, of, of which I say that it's
quote unquote, epistemically blurry, which is really the summary
of everything I just said, you know, there's something
there, and I'm not entirely sure what it is
because it's blurry, uh, and it might turn out,
turn out not to be as interesting as I
thought, but, but precisely because of the blurriness, um,
I'm gonna investigate it because it seems like an
interesting object right now. Now, what are objects of
research in psychology and how are they different from
phenomena? Now, of course, it's, it's perfectly, you, you
could say, well, it's an, it's, it's an, you
know, this is an interesting phenomenon that we have
here, you know, I mean, have these priming effects,
um, that's an interesting phenomenon. Um, I'm gonna call
the phenomenon uh implicit memory. Um. In my book,
I try to, or I, I draw a kind
of terminological distinction here, and between an object of
research, which is the object that we're interested, like,
which is a kind of a more, a broader
category. So, when I say I'm interested in, in
this priming effect, that That I would say is
a phenomenon, uh, in the sense of the, the
philosophers, uh, Jim Bogan and Jim Woodward have a
paper, Saving the Phenomena, uh, from 1988. And in
that paper, they say phenomena are, or in that
paper are one of the fallout papers, they say
phenomena are stable regularities in the world. Um, SO
I would say kind of following that definition, a
phenomenon, uh, like a priming effect is a phenomenon
insofar as it's a stable regularity in the world
which one can debate, but let's just assume that
it is a stable regularity, that's a phenomenon. Um,
NOW, my claim is that objects of psychological research
are comprised of multiple phenomena. So, you might, you
might get interested in implicit memory because of the
priming effect, which you take to be indicative of
this object that you are now interested in, but
the two are not the same. I think the,
the, the notion of an object of research which
you then give a name. Um, YOU know, implicit
memory, it's closely connected with the priming effect, but
it's not the same. So that, that's how I
draw the distinction. Um, YOU were also asking about
mechanisms, um, so mechanisms, for example, cognitive mechanisms or
neural mechanisms. I would say are, are, are phenomenon
because they're repeatable regularities. Uh, AND so I would
argue that an object of psychological research. Um WHICH
consists of multiple phenomena, some of those phenomena can
be mechanisms, right? But not all of them have
to be mechanisms. They can also be behavioral regularities
or they can be certain regularities in, in kind
of types of experiences people have. Um, OR, you
know, kinds of, uh, kinds of, um, cognitive processes
that, that, that are associated with an object. So,
so yeah, the, the short answer to your question
is the, the, the term object of research, uh,
in, as in general means something that we're interested
in. In the case of psychology, I claim, or
at least the, the types that I'm interested in,
in my work are, uh, are objects that are
described by terms like implicit memory, working memory, perception,
personality, those are the objects, but obviously when we
start looking at them, we're gonna try to give
a much more fine-grained account, uh, which shows how
this object is constituted of multiple phenomena.
So what is operationism then and what, what are
the origins of the term?
Hm, what is operationalism? OK, right. Uh, I started
off by saying that was the motivation for writing
this book that I was interested in what operationism
is in psychology as opposed to the way in
which philosophers talk about it. So you can already
see that the question is kind of a loaded
question because depending on who you ask, when you
ask people might give you different answers. Um, NOW,
The term, and maybe this is a good moment
to also go back to the distinction between the
word operationism and the word operationalism, um, in psychology,
especially like in the 1940s at least, many psychologists
use the term operationism, but other people also, um,
use the term operationalism, and I, um, and especially
the latter term is typically. Attributed to the physicist
Percy Bridgman, who wrote a book in 1927, he
was at Harvard. He wrote a book in 1927
called The Logic of Modern Physics. And in it,
he has, amongst other things, the very nice sentence
that states something like, the meaning, uh, but no,
by a concept, we mean nothing but a set
of operations. So that formulation sounds as if he
was trying to say that the meaning of a
concept is um Completely um determined or there's nothing
to the meaning of the concept, but, um, but
some, some operations, some measurement operations, that's how it's
usually taken, that's what it's usually taken to mean.
And of course, phrase like that, it sounds a
lot like another very popular position that was like
in, in philosophy, uh, in philosophy at the same
time or around the same time, namely, um, verificationism.
That, that's the, the, the idea that the meaning
of a sentence uh consists in the, in the,
in, in, in the method of verification or and
that the sentence is only meaningful if there is
a method of verification, uh, and that a term
is only meaningful insofar as it figures in a
verifiable, in, in a sentence that is testable in
principle. So, um, so given the similarities and also
given the fact that, you know, right around that
time, um, European immigrants, uh, were, you know, coming
to the US, um, from the German speaking world,
people like, uh, Karnav and Reichenbach, um, there was
an, um, and also actually at the time there
was a lot of interaction between psychologists and philosophers
which I find really fascinating in the, in the
history of, of philosophy of science. Um, IT was
natural to assume that these two positions are very
closely related. And so in a certain thing, in
a certain sense, I think they are, but in
a certain sense, I also think they really aren't
because as a practicing scientist, you're not primarily interested
in the semantics of scientific terms, you're interested in
um what, you know, maybe what you're entitled to
say in an experimental situation or you're interested in
like, how can I use this term to conduct
my research? How does this term describe the objects
I'm interested in? Um, AND so, Percy Bridgman definitely
was trying to express. Um, AND a note of
caution. So, so, his, the general gist of where
he's coming from is, let's try to be careful
to not overextend our concepts. When we have a
concept like mass or gravity or whatever, um, That
comes out of our particular physical tradition, like classical
physics. Um, WE should not assume that it holds
in the same way or that it's applicable in
the same way in, in other realms, you know,
much more macro realms or much or, or, or
micro realms. We have to be very cautious about
this, and of course, in, in this caution, he
was informed by the recent relativistic revolution. Um, SO
he, he was very kind of struck by, you
know, you really can't over, you really have to
kind of, uh, maybe contextualize the use of your
terms, uh, a little bit. So that at least
is, is my reading of what Bridgman really intended.
Um, BUT that's, you know, my book is not
about Bridgman, um, but there, there's, um, but, but
psychologists at the time were picking up on the
notion of operational definition, um. Partly from Bridgeman, um,
but I think also using it in a slightly
different way. And so in my book, I have
in, in chapter Two, I think that's the first
substantive chapter. Um, I talk about a number of
early experimental psychologists who start saying, using the terminology
of operational definition. And, um, and really the kind
of the basic gist of it. Uh, IS that
they're, that they're saying, if we want to get
a grip on our subject matter, we need to
have a method of measurement that we're going to
treat as um, Providing us with data about this
object. Mhm. Now you were asking, sorry, you were
asking about the, the history of the term operational
definition, the history
of operationism, yes,
right, right, so. Yeah, so maybe I'll just stop
right here and, and give you a chance to
ask another question.
Yeah, I mean, I was going to ask you
what is an operational definition and what is the
connection between operational definitions and experiments.
Right. So, um, yeah, I guess I've already started
talking a little bit about operational definitions. They're typically,
you know, associated with means of measurement, you know,
you have a method of measurement, kind of, there's
this very famous quote by a psychologist Edwin Boring,
who actually, by the way, said this in early
in 1923, i.e., before Bridgman. Um, HE says, um,
by intelligence, we're just, we just mean whatever the
tests measures. Um, AND this is another reason why,
um, Or this let's say this expresses, this is
a very provocative statement that expresses a um something
that seems intuitively wrong, right? Uh, SO, Why if,
if by, if by intelligence you simply mean what
you measure, well then, what you measure by a
particular test, don't you first need kind of um
independent evidence that the test really measures this thing,
right? And so I think that's where a lot
of people's, people are uncomfortable with operationalism. In part,
because they think it expresses some very weird, um,
this kind of weird position where, where somehow you've
already defined your object in terms of the method
of measurement, but then how did you, you know,
how do you know that it's a good measure,
method of measurement for whatever you're trying to measure?
Um, I think we should keep in mind that
Boring is really talking, uh, in a, in a
very applied context. He's just saying, look, we're using
these, these, these intelligence tests. They, they serve a
purpose, they have a specific, maybe predictive value, whether
or not they do is a, is a separate
question. Uh, LET'S just not, let's just stop having
this kind of philosophical discussion of whether they're really
measuring intelligence. Let, let's just, they're, they're just a
tool. Uh, AND I think in certain contexts, that's
a reasonable position to take. I think in a,
in a more kind of basic science context, it's
not a reasonable position to take because we, it,
it seems intuitively, no, we, we do want to
think about what intelligence really is and What whether
we have good reasons to and and whether and
and what are its features, uh, and, and how
do we go about investigating it um and so
that's where I think operational definitions come in in
the way in which I use the term and
the way in which I use the term is
informed by uh, an analysis of the writings of
basically in the book, in my book, um, 3.
Important figures in psychology in the 1930s and 19
well actually earlier 1920s to 1950s, um, but I'm
focusing on writings from the 1930s primarily where, um,
and these 33 figures are SS Stevens, psychophysicist, um,
Um Um, sorry, I'm blanking on the first name.
Uh, Edward Tolman and, uh, and Clark Hull. All
three of them, and, uh, Tolman and Hull are
known as, nowadays, they'd be referred to as neo-behaviorists.
So what I'm saying about all three of them.
Is that even though they use terms like operationism
and operational definitions, none of them are saying um
the meaning of, of psychological terms is exhausted by,
by some means of measurement. Rather, what they're all,
what they all seem to be saying is, if
we want to study things like conscious experience in
the, in the case of SS Stevens, or um
Demands and cognitions, uh, in, in the, in the
case of um Tolman, for example, then we need
to have experimental methods or we need to have
a way to tie the, the, the use of
these terms very clearly to specific empirical um circumstances
because we don't, we don't want to lose kind
of, um, we don't, we, we don't want our
Psychological theorizing to become too detached from, from the
kind of empirical basis. Uh, AND that also becomes
very clear in the, in the third person I
just mentioned, Clark Hull, who basically, I mean, his
aim was to produce, to construct a psychological theory
from the bottom up. And, and so his idea
is, first, we, we, um, We start with our
basic concepts that we try to kind of tie
to particular experimental paradigms. Uh, AND so then we,
we kind of, um, And, and those paradigms involve
particular operational definitions. They involve, when I say, so
in the case of, of Stevens, for example, when
I say experience, I mean discriminative behavior. Uh, I
mean, um, I mean, you know, people respond to
sensory stimulation in, in a way, in a specific
way. Now, this might at first blush sound as
if Stevens was saying experience, the term experience means
nothing but discriminatory behavior. But importantly, he actually says,
for the purpose of science. So, so he's, I
think when you actually read his, his work on
psychophysics, it's very clear that he thinks experience has
a conscious dimension. There's to experience is to have
a conscious to have a conscious, uh, what we
might say, um, To be in a conscious, uh,
state, phenomenal conscious state. Um, BUT How do you
access somebody's phenomenal conscious state by uh presenting them
with stimuli and then in some way, um, eliciting
responses to that, to, to, uh to the stimulation
and those responses are then going to be data
that tell us something about the experience of the
subject. So, so here this is, this is, I
think is a nice example of how it sounds
as if he were kind of reductively defining, reductively
defining experience as nothing but a particular kind of
behavior, but on my construal, he's actually operationally defining,
um, he's merely saying this is how I'm gonna
measure it. Um, HERE'S my object of research, conscious
experience, and I'm, I'm measuring it, uh, by, by
setting up experiments that, that, um, treat data in
response to sensory stimulation as evidence for whatever I
wanna say about this, uh this object of research,
i.e. experience.
So in the book you suggest that the central
unit of analysis for our epistemological considerations of psychological
research should be concepts and not theories. Could you
explain that?
Well, when you think about, I mean, so maybe
a little bit of, again, my, my autobiographical background
is, I don't really know that, I mean, it's
been, there's a little bit of discussion in psychology
recently, but it's not that clear what a theory
is in, in psychology, uh, and how many theories
there are, um, and like what it takes to
kind of Focus on a theory. To me, it
just seemed much more obvious that we're focusing on
things, objects, the kinds of things we're interested in.
So if we're interested in a particular objects, so
as we've kind of been, I've been indicating in
my book, one of the objects that then kind
of takes up, like one of my case studies
is about memory, and I talk about implicit memory
and about working memory. So if my object is
memory, um, Then I, I argued that the I
mean, yes, maybe in the long run, we would
like a theory of memory, but my, my main
claim here is that in order to even come
up with a theory, we have to explore the
object and exploring the object really means working with
concepts, uh, with the concepts that we have. We
don't necessarily have a big grand theory of memory,
but we do have a kind of folk psychological
concept of memory that, um, Involves, for example, memory
is something that, you know, uh, is the result
of learning, it's, it, it, it involves the idea
that something is being stored and that something can
be retrieved. So I think we kind of go,
our researchers go into their experiment with the um
With this, these kind of very basic concepts, which
inform the way they approach their subject matter. And
now of course, we could, we can question whether
these concepts, whether that's a good way to go,
right? I mean, in philosophy of mind, there's a
lot of discussion about folk psychology and whether we
should even use our folk psychological concepts to do,
to do um empirical research. Um, I have opinions
about this. One opinion is that actually the, in,
in, when this is discussed, In philosophy of psychology.
Often the assumption is that um folk psychological concepts
are explanatory concepts. I.E. their concepts that is that
people appeal to, to explain behavior. So in my
book, I take a different, I have a different
take on it. I think they're primarily taxonomic concepts.
We, we take kind of memory to be, we
classify psychological objects in certain ways. And a lot
of research, I claim, is not primarily. GEARED at
Explaining behavior, but at at getting a fuller More,
a fuller, more nuanced understanding of a given kind
of object. Um And So, so, yeah, so back
to your question, that's part of why, why I
say start with the object, um, about which we
want to build a theory, maybe, ultimately, rather than
with a theory when we don't even know what
the object is. So, it's kind of, there, I'm
also really following my historical actors because I just
found them very persuasive, that Somebody like Hull, I
mean, he's kind of been forgotten, and, I mean,
he's, he's not that, uh, he's, he's, he was
hugely important, you know, in the 1940s. Um, AND
nowadays, he's more, you know, I don't think he's,
he's a very central theoretical figure, but I think
the kind of the basic insight, um, is still
worth that he, that he had is still worth
considering, which is, um, start, start with, with You
know, the units that we're interested in. In his
case, he was interested in habits. How do we
conceptualize habits? How do we construct experiments about habits?
Um, And that means starting with concepts, concepts of
the things that we're interested in.
Mhm. So what is discovery and what is justification,
and what is the distinction between them?
So in philosophy of science. That's often, you know,
a distinction people draw. And again, I think I'm
just, um, I, I, I, I assume you're inviting
me to say a little bit about um how
this distinction is often appealed to in traditional philosophy.
So there's this kind of traditional idea that, you
know, philosophers are interested in normative questions, philosophers are
interested in, like, what are, you know, what are
good rational reasons to Uh, to believe something, given
the evidence, you know, how well are our theories
confirmed, etc. AND those kinds of questions. ARE asked
and take place in the context of this uh
of justification, right? Because it's all about justifying some
idea that we have, that we already have. Um,
AND by contrast, traditionally people have, have argued that
just that, I'm sorry that I'm getting all the
terms confused here, that discovery is whatever way in
which People come up with their ideas. Uh, THEY
don't have to be logically justified. They can be,
you know, people have ideas from all kinds of
places and then, in random ways, you know, interesting
ideas might come up, come to their minds. Um,
AND because of that, we can maybe describe how
the ideas can come to people's minds, but it's
not properly the subject matter of philosophy of science
because there is no logic to this. There is
no kind of, there are no rational rules of
how you discover. So that's kind of the traditional
picture. Now, that picture has actually been kind of
under attack for like several decades, um, at least,
at least since the work of Thomas Kuhn. Um,
But I think it's still very pervasive uh on
some level, like, how do you talk about discovery?
Now, in my book, I actually kind of wanna
get away from that terminology, because I, I, I
think it's artificial. Um, I think it is, of
course, entirely possible that sometimes people randomly have some
brilliant ideas, but I also think there's a lot
of um Um, I wouldn't say, yeah, there, there,
there's, um, People have good reasons for coming up
with particular ideas. They're theoretically motivated. Um, THEY follow
from previous, um, experiments. They follow from, from previous
theories, they follow from, um, kind of putting various
considerations together in a, in a creative novel way.
Now, um, So I, so I think Like I,
like I just said, the, the, the distinction between
discovery and justification certainly doesn't, if it describes anything
very well, it certainly doesn't describe kind of a
chronological step where, you know, first you have discovery
and then you have justification. Um, BUT because there's
so much confusion about what these terms really mean
and what they, what they're applicable to, I actually
prefer the term exploration. Uh, AS you, um, may
have noticed, my book has the subtitle in Epistemology
of Exploration. And that also gets us back maybe
to the, to your previous question about um or
your multiple questions, uh, concepts and objects, because what
I, what I try to focus on or to
the, the way I try to ask the question
about discovery, uh, is not as something that somehow
happens as distinct from, from, from justification, but rather
as in terms of We are trying to explore.
Scientists explore a particular domain, and in order to
explore this domain, they have to make certain assumptions
about the kinds of objects that this domain is
populated by. So, the psychological domain, right? Um, INTUITIVELY
contains things like, you know, cognition, emotion, perception, uh,
Desires. Um, BUT, but also things like maybe, you
know, mental disorder or personality or develop, you know,
the child development. Uh, SO it, it contains a,
a large array of, of things, and in my
mind to do psychological research is to explore that
domain in a, uh, systematic fashion. And that's just,
it's kind of by, by focusing also on the
systematic on, on the, on the way in which
exploration is systematic, I also kind of want to
counteract the narrative according to which discovery is not
systematic, um, so, so, so this kind of systematic
process of exploration, I think kind of really blends
together aspects of what was previously referred to as
discovery and as justification.
Mhm. Uh, AND what is the interplay between theory
and evidence in the investigative process?
So, as, as I'm, I've said at the beginning,
I think of, and one reason why I'm really
interested in the relationship between operation or operational definitions
or operationalizations on the one hand, an experiment is
What happens when you're operationally defining your concepts? Is
you're, you're thinking about how to Measure your object
in a way that produces or to pro how
to produce data in a way that are, that,
that are informative of the object you're interested in.
Um. And so It's not the case. So, so
I think the kind of the implication of that
is that researchers already put a lot of Mental
energy and thought into, um, into their research design
before they even have data, um, uh data which
then are gonna function as evidence. And this is
important because I think it counteracts a particular way
of talking about evidence. That always seems to assume
like that the evidence is just out there. So
what I wanna really highlight in my work is
that evidence is produced. It's produced with specific conceptual
um presuppositions in mind that have to be in
place. And so even, so this is, of course,
especially obvious when you, you know, in experiments because
you're literally producing the data. I mean, you're, you
know, Uh, you have your subjects, you present them
with stimuli, you record their behavior, and that, that
behavior is then, you know, your data, um, quantified
in the appropriate manner or whatever. Um, SO, so
clearly that, you know, you're not just out there
observing, you are. Observing the data that you produced
with a particular question in mind and with particular
conceptual presuppositions in mind. So this also kind of
picks up on, on one of your previous questions
about the kind of how is um concepts and,
and experiment intertwined, right? I mean, it's intertwined in
the sense that the concepts inform the, the, the
experimental design which produces the data and so the
data are in an important way kind of conceptually
laden. But I'm not sure, like, yeah, sorry, can
you remind me of your question?
Uh, YEAH, I mean, uh, I was asking you
about the interplay between theory and evidence in the,
yeah.
Yeah, and of course maybe that, that's also a
good moment to kind of go back to the
earlier question about why do I, why do I
focus on concepts and not on theories, um, because,
uh, so I, I see a close interplay between
concepts, and, and data, but of course you could
ask and maybe rightly so, what's the difference between,
you know, theoretical and conceptual, right? Um, AND, and
I think that's, that's a, you know, a very
legitimate question. Um, AND it kind of, I think,
goes back to I, I, I feel that theory
is a very broad term, and I'm not always
quite sure what it means, and by talking about
concepts, I think I'm um uh. So, so there's
a sense in which if I, if I say,
you know, my concept of memory, you know, involves,
you know, that something is learned and something is
stored and something can be retrieved, then you could
say, well, isn't that also a theory, right? Because
there are certain, you know, connections, um, kind of
maybe more or less law-like between, you know, various,
um, Aspects um of, of, of this domain of
research. And so, on a, on a loose understanding
of theory, you could say that's also, that, that
is, that is, of course, theoretical. Um, I think
I've just been kind of, um, and so I
think, yeah, in a way, I, I, I did
take myself to be answering your question about the
relationship between theory and evidence, even though I, I
tend to talk more about concepts than about theories.
Right. And what are reasoning practices and which of
their aspects are you interested in when trying to
understand the investigative process?
Great. So reasoning practices. Yeah, I mean, I think
I, I, I would say that I probably use
the, the, the term in a very intuitive way.
I mean, reasoning practices are whatever we engage in
when we reason, we make, you know, we make
connections between concepts, we make predictions based on things
that we have learned in the past, um, we
draw uh maybe more, more specifically in science, um.
We come up with hypothesis to test. We, um,
draw inferences, you know, statistical inferences, I think would
also constitute types of reasoning practices. Um, AND as
you may have gathered, I think that the reasoning,
what the reasoning practice that I am primarily interested
in is really the one of, um, the kinds
of practices that go into experimental design. Because, um,
because I think that's, that's where a lot of
Decisions are being made, uh, about, I mean, it,
it, it, it, they are informed by specific assumptions
that we already have about the subject matter, um.
And so a, a lot hangs on them. Um,
AND I think, a lot of the time when
we talk about, well, what do the data really
show and then is, are the, you know, are
the inferences really, um, really justified. It's, I think
a lot of the time this is not about,
it can be, but it's a lot of the
time not just about did I apply the statistics
correctly. It's about, do the data really, um, do
I have good reason to assume that the data
really show what I, what, what I, what I
want them to show. And what I claimed them
to show.
Right, and what would you say is the role
that philosophy should play when it comes to scientific
investigation?
I think that's a very, that's an interesting question,
and, and I'm, I might, I, I suspect that
some people might say philosophy, you know, Like, why
should philosophy play a role in in psychological investigation,
right? It's a different discipline. We reflect about science,
scientists do their own thing. And to, to be
honest, for the longest time, I mean, I, I
have a, you know, basic training in psychology, but
then when I went into philosophy, and for a
long time, um, I was just interested in understanding
psychology better. I did not necessarily take myself to
aim at improving, you know, psychology, and, and I
still don't. I mean, I, I, that would, you
know, I, I I am interested in talking to
psychologists, but I'm not sure that I would make
a strong normative statement about what role philosophy should
play. Um, HAVING said that, I do feel that
there is a stronger interest. On the side of
psychologists in philosophy, science than there was 10 or
20 years ago. So when I kind of left
psychology, um, I don't remember kind of psychology, friends
and colleagues being very receptive to the kinds of
questions, to the kinds of more basic epistemological questions
I was interested in. Um, AND I think that's
changed a little bit in the last, you know,
10 or 20 years. And so now I do
find psychologists interested in philosophy of science, and while
I don't think that philosophy should play a role,
I do hope that it can play a role.
Um, AND that it's, um, like the kinds of,
the kinds of things I think about, that those
are things that could be fruitful for psychologists to
think about as well. Mhm.
And what do you make of the replication crisis?
I mean, in what ways would you have something
to say about it through the kinds of topics
you explore in your book?
Um, So the, yeah, the replication crisis, of course,
that's, of course, I think I was indirectly already
referring to that earlier. I mean, in response to
your last question, like why is it that philosophy
psychologists are more interested in, in philosophy now? It
is in part because of the replication crisis because
there Has been due to the fact, I mean,
probably most listeners know this, um, many experimental results
don't replicate, so it's been, you know, it's, it's
impossible or they, people when, when redoing experiments or
reanalyzing the data, either one of the two, you
don't get the same results, and that has that
has led to a lot of soul searching within
the psychological community, um. And yeah, as I said,
I think it's part of why in they've, they're
kind of psychologists, you know, are, are taking a,
a, a harder look at their own epistemological foundations
and at the kind of philosophical work that's out
there. Um, WHAT do I make of it? Well,
when I first heard of it, I, I was
just really um delighted. I shouldn't say that, that's,
that's awful, you know, I shouldn't be delighted at
something that is, you know, um a terrible problem,
um, but no, let me qualify this and say,
I was just, I was intrigued because I had
been thinking about experiments. And, and so to me,
it was clearly an issue that was interesting from
a philosophy experiment, philosophy of experiment perspective. Um. If
you think about psychological experiments, what reasons, you know,
might there be to expect that replication is hard.
Now, to be honest, like in philosophy experimentation, not
just in psychology, but more generally, that's just kind
of, that's just something. That's a standard piece of
knowledge that it's really hard to do experiments, and
it's really hard to get them right, and it's
really hard, and because it's really hard to get
them right, it's also really hard to replicate them.
So that's been kind of a long standing discussion
within, you know, STS and history and philosophy experimentation.
And kind of coming from that, I, I kind
of, kind of brought in, I mean, I've, I've
written a, a, a few papers about, about, about
that, about the replication crisis kind of from the
perspective of philosophy experimentation. Um, AS you probably know,
there, there is a whole Um, most of the
literature on, on, on the replication crisis has focused
more on the statistical side, um, of, uh, of
psychological research practices, i.e., on, uh, on questions of,
um, What might be statistical practices that have led
to The inflation of seemingly um significant results, um,
such that we now realize that a lot of
these results actually, you know, weren't significant. Um, SO
there's a lot of debate about that and I'm
not a philosopher of statistics, so I just haven't
really engaged in that part of the, the debate
as much. Um, COMING, but I think the debate
about the replication crisis has also really branched out
in recent years and people are, so there's still
this whole bit about um questionable research practices, how
do you improve statistical practices, um, and again, And
I think that's a, a valuable thing to be
thinking about. Others have pointed out that there's also
a problem with the kind of lack of theoretical
conceptual depth of psychology, that there's a lot of
focus on producing effects. Um, THERE'S a big debate
about why, how that focus is, is connected with
the current incentive structure in psychology where people have
to publish and, and that often I feel, um,
Leads to maybe paying less attention to the conceptual
side. Um, SO, so that's been, that's been a
recent part of the debate. There's also, um, I
think renewed interest in the whole question of like
validity in psychology. So I think, what do I
think of the replication crisis? I think it has
really given rise, kind of speaking positively. It has
given rise to a lot of methodological questions that
I'm very interested in and that are super important
for psychology. And so, I guess uh the hopeful
part of me thinks, um, yeah, the replication crisis
has the potential to really Uh, improve practices, not
just with regards to statistics, but also um with
regard to other aspects. And going back to my
own work, um, what do I think, I think,
um, Uh, or at least coming from where I'm
coming from, I would draw attention to the, to
the more conceptual side of experimentation. Let, let's not
just think about what went wrong, you know, how
did people misuse statistics once they had their data,
but what went wrong in the processes of data
generation, um, And of course, people are doing that
to some extent when they're talking about, you know,
statistical power and like larger, uh, groups, I mean,
larger uh subject groups, but also the, like the
truly conceptual side of how do we, what kinds
of questions ought we be pursuing, how should we
be pursuing them, and how, um, Let's spend more
time thinking about operationalization of questions.
What is a robust finding? What, what does that
mean?
That depends on who you ask, I think. Um,
IN, in philosophy of science, there is, I mean,
I think we use the term probably, again, kind
of intuitively, right? A robust finding is a good
finding, a reliable finding maybe, but in philosophy of
science, there's a somewhat technical meaning that again goes
back maybe to the early 80s, where it's been,
it's often the, the notion of robustness is often
used to Describe um. Having multiple independent ways of
of of reaching the same result. So then, so
if you have that, that's, that's robust, robust, um.
Now, in my book, I talk a little bit
about that. So there's in chapter, one of the
early chapters, I, um, I talk about the, the
19 40s, 50s where um people in psychology, methodologists
uh were thinking about test validity. And validity, um,
that's a whole, yeah, huge topic that we can't
go into right now, but, but one answer was
something called the multi-trait multi-method, uh, approach, where, you
know, you, um, have several different methods and you
use them to test for the same trait. Um,
BUT you also, um, Use these methods for different
traits. Um, Just to make sure that Sorry, I
have to, I have to um reconstruct the logic
here. So, yeah, so, so, I'm gonna just ignore
this for now. Anyway, the multi-trade, multi-method uh approach
is somewhat similar to the Robust to the, to
the, to the logic of robustness reasoning that emerged
within philosophy of science in the 80s where it
was associated with names like William Wimsatt. Uh Wimsatt
incidentally actually gets the idea in part or at
least appeals to Donald Campbell, who is one of
the architects of the multi-trade, multi-method approach. So, um
In my, so, so that's maybe the kind of
mainstream way of talking about robustness and also it's,
it's one mainstream way of thinking about the relationship
between robustness reasoning as it's used in psychology and,
and sorry, in philosophy and in psychology where it
maybe refers to a particular way of validating tests.
Um. Now, my own take is the robustness. Reasoning
understood in this way. Still is too wedded to
an kind of an older way of doing philosophy
of science, which really just tries to kind of
validate or confirm an idea that's already there. So
let's say, you know, I believe that there is,
you know, whatever. Working memory exists or something, um,
then I, you know, have, you know, 5 different
working memory tests and, uh, and, and the, the
tests are validated and the finding can be shown
to be robust, um, if they're all correlated with
one another. Um, NOW, that might be, um, Important
and relevant sometimes, and especially it is relevant probably
when you're trying to validate a test that you
don't want to use, you know, in particular context,
but I don't think it fully does justice to
the research situation, which is more than Dynamic where
you're not, you don't just want to validate the
test, you want to find out something about the
object. You want to find out, OK, so now
I have the test, but like what else can
we say about working memory? What are its features?
What is its, its capacity? What is its duration?
And all of these things, um, kind of go
beyond mere existence claims. They're descriptive questions that we
try to answer. And so in my um In,
in my book, I draw on a um On
A notion that I got also from the older
psychological literature called converging operations. Converging operations at first
sight, it might sound as if it were just
kind of some robustness reasoning, right? You converge on
the same thing. But in fact, um, Garner Hack
and all, um, who wrote this article, um, had
a different idea in mind. What they say, when,
what, what they have in mind when they talk
about, um, converging operations is the idea that you
produce, uh, you have a particular descriptive question, for
example, about your, about your object memory, you test
it, uh, you get data, um, but As always,
the data are in principle underdetermined by the evidence,
of the, the sorry, the, uh, the, the, the
inference you want to draw is underdetermined by your
data. So, what this means is there conceivably, there
could be a different explanation for the data. So,
if you have that situation, and I think, you
know, you frequently have the situation, not only that,
yeah, well, in principle, there could be a different
explanation, but in psychology, where we have massive, um,
a massive degree of underdetermination and, and, and a
massive degree of Uncertainty. Um, OFTEN, psychologists have very
specific alternative explanations. They say, well, yes, it could
be due to, uh, what I think it's due
to. I, you know, I manipulate, I, I, I
conducted this manipulation, I think I manipulated working memory,
but I might have, you know, actually manipulated attention.
Um, SO, so, So what do I do? Well,
I have to conduct a follow-up experiment which specifically
tries to differentiate between these two interpretations of the
data. And, and so what we're talking about here
then is not, um. It's not just kind of
finding evidence in support of a particular interpretation, but
it's rather a process by which the concept gets
gradually refined um by kind of getting By fine
tuning the kinds of descriptive questions we ask in
light of the, the different possibilities that any data,
um, are compatible with.
OK, so I have one last question then. Do
you think that the analysis you present in your
book generalizes beyond psychology?
I wanna be careful about that, but of course,
I'd like to think, I'd like to think that
they generalize in some, in some sense. So I've
talked to um I've talked to physicists, like historians
of physics, who typically will say something like, yeah,
um, Of course, in earlier times, um, there was
a lot more uncertainty about the subject matter. Um,
AND so, certainly my analysis would be apt for
those earlier times. However, I think even At a
point in time where we have a lot more
detailed, firm theoretical knowledge in other sciences than in
psychology, I think the basic fact that you're, you're,
um, That your data are very, that the data
produced in experiments are very far removed from The
kinds of theoretical or conceptual questions you're trying to
test. I think that is true of all of
science. Um, AND so the kind of drawing attention
to what went into the, the way we design
an experiment, I think that is probably um, And,
and also like, where do we, where do we,
um, there, there's so many kind of points at
which we can question uh results by asking, well,
how was it produced? I, I think that is
probably true of others, of other scientists. I would
certainly think it is um kind of going back
to psychology, which, as I said, is characterized by
this huge amount of epistemic uncertainty and openness. I
think that's probably true of many scientists even today
that deal with complex systems, right? And so, so
in that regard, I think probably a lot of
the things I say do generalize. Great.
So the book is again Operationism in Psychology and
Epistemology of Exploration. I will be leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
Doctor Fei, just before we go apart from the
book, would you like to tell people where they
can find your work on the internet?
Hmm. So, yeah, so where can you find me
on the internet? I would say probably uh fill
papers and fill people. Um, I think it's probably
most up to-date because my, my departmental um web
page is only as up to date as I
keep it, which, and um, I have, I, I
tend to be behind, and I think the one
place where you're most likely to find me kind
of frequently is Blue Sky. So I have a
Blue Sky account where I post. Regularly, I mean,
not frequently but regularly, so I think that that's
where you would find information about me and about
current and recent research.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you. It's been a real pleasure on my
part.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.